I'm going to show you how to squat for
maximal growth. So, what is growth?
Growth is building muscle, building
strength, and all of that good stuff.
Before we put a barbell on her back and
talk about different barbell positions,
we're going to talk about setting up in
her ideal squat stance. Everybody is
different depending on their shape and
size and proportions. But one
recommendation that I can give that will
suit everybody is to start with your
feet just outside of shoulder width,
toes pointed very slightly outwards.
From here, you're going to see she's not
just standing passively. What we like to
do is externally rotate the hip joint.
So, this bone here externally rotates.
And you're going to see her screwing her
feet into the ground. The next thing
you're going to see is her knees
pointing very slightly outwards. And
that will make her feet feel like
they're really gripping onto that
ground. And now when she lowers her body
into that bottom position, her hips
open, her knees point out in the same
direction as her toes, and allow for
room for her pelvis to achieve that
bottom position and remain neutral. Now,
let's have a look at this with the
barbell on the back. Starting with the
hand position,
you grab the barbell as close as your
shoulder mobility allows. Denny is very
mobile, so her grip is very close. Now,
coming under the barbell, what we want
to do is place that barbell on the shelf
created by her rear delts. From here,
she pulls her elbows back, which allows
her to use her middle back muscles to
hold upper back tightness. Elbows back
creates this shelf for the barbell to
sit on. Now, she's going to think about
back and down. That down component
allows her to activate her strong lats,
which act as a stabilizer of the core.
They attach at the front of the shoulder
and come all the way down to the top of
the hip. So, of all of our core muscles,
the lats actually cover the longest
distance of our spine. So, when they're
active, they do a great role in keeping
this torso nice and rigid so we can load
it as heavy as possible. From this
position, looking straight ahead with
her feet underneath her hips, she takes
a big breath and takes three steps out.
The first step is straight back, the
others in her ideal squat stance.
Looking straight ahead because the body
follows the eyes, screwing her feet into
the ground. She takes a big breath to
brace and she opens her hips, spreading
the floor, knees out in the same
direction as her toes. She controls that
weight down to the bottom position and
gradually accelerates in and out of the
hole. The speed of the up phase is
standing with intent, which is explosive
but still under control. Something that
you're going to notice here is a forward
torso lean just to balance the barbell
over a midfoot. It also means that
there's going to be a more of a hip
angle, making it a much more hip
dominant movement, which is handy when
we want to shift the heaviest loads.
That muscles around the hip are a lot
larger than the muscles around the knee.
Something that's very important,
regardless of the type of squat
position, is that we line up collar of
the bar in line with the midfoot. When
we do a low bar squat, the position of
the barbell on the back forces the torso
to lean very slightly forward to allow
for this collar to line up with the
center of our base of support, or in
other words, with our midoot. So, this
is why you're going to see more forward
torso lean in a low bar squat. What
you're also going to see is a lot more
happening at the hip joint and less
happening at the knee joint. If you look
at the space between the hamstrings and
the calf, they're not going to be
touching compared to the high bar squat
where the objective is to press the
hamstring against the calf to ensure
that we're maximizing our knee joint
flexion. Now, let's have a look at the
high bar squat. In my opinion, this is
the number one squat pattern to build
quadriceps. Walking up to the barbell,
grabbing it as close as a shoulder
mobility allows. coming under the
barbell. Placing the barbell on the
upper trapezius. Pulling the elbows back
and shoulder blades down to activate all
of the right muscles of the upper back
and creating a nice shelf of upper
trapezius muscle for that barbell to
rest on. Taking a big breath to brace.
She going to take the same three steps.
Standing in her comfortable stance,
initiating the movement by screwing her
feet into the floor. Taking a big breath
to brace. Looking straight ahead. She
squats as deep as her mobility allows.
With this squat pattern, you're going to
see a much more upright torso angle, and
you're going to see a lot more knee
bend. Let's have a look at how different
footwear can modify the way that we use
our different muscles in our squats.
Starting off with an elevated heel
weightlifting shoe. This is the shoe
that we love to use when we're doing a
high bar squat, but if you lack the
mobility for any of your squat patterns,
it's fine to use them for all squat
variations. Have a look at how when
Denny comes down into the full squat
pattern, there's a little bit of forward
torso lean, but not as much as in a low
bar squat, but it's also not as upright
as when we really elevate those heels.
The hamstrings press up against the
calf, so it's great for quadriceps
development. Now, let's exaggerate that
exact position for the squat pattern to
hit your quadriceps better. You want the
torso to be more upright, and you want
the pelvis and spine to be as neutral as
possible. And some people don't have the
mobility to achieve that position. So my
favorite tool to help achieve this is
elevating the heels. The rule that we
have with stance width is the wider the
stance, the more adductors and hip
muscles we're using. So if the goal is
to focus on quads, we don't want to do
that. So therefore, targeting the quads,
bring the feet in a little bit more. So,
with a slightly closer stance and the
heels elevated an inch from the shoes
and about 2 in from the platform, that's
a very high heel elevation. Have a look
at how deep she can get while still
maintaining a very upright torso angle
and a neutral spine position. And look
how much her hamstring covers the entire
surface of her calf, making it a very
good quadriceps buildup. The bigger the
heel, the less stable the movement,
meaning a little bit less weight, but
it's going to mean a lot more quadriceps
focused exercise. Same rules, hands as
close as mobility allows. Elbows back,
shoulder blades down. This time, we're
standing very slightly closer to
emphasize quadriceps. Looking straight
ahead, taking a big breath to brace.
squatting as deep as her mobility
allows, which is a lot deeper and much
more upright torso angle, much more knee
bend, much more percentage of the calf
is being covered by that hamstring. Now,
let's have a look at no shoes at all or
that's going to be equivalent to a flat
sold shoe, which is my preference for a
hip dominant low bar squat. So, the rule
is when I want to use more hips, I stand
very slightly wider. So, a low bar squat
with flat sold shoes or no shoes at all.
We want the widest of all of those squat
variations. So, slightly wider stance,
you're going to see more forward torso
lean, less knee bend,
so less surface of this calf is being
covered by that hamstring.
And most of the work happens at this big
strong hip joint, which is handy when
we're trying to shift the heaviest loads
possible. The best way that I like to
teach the squat is to control the
movement into the bottom position,
gradually accelerate in and out of the
hole, and then stand with intent. Now,
this is important for squatting heavy
weights, and it's also important for
building muscle. Control wins every
time. You may see some of your favorite
Olympic weightlifterss where they squat
very fast and they bounce in and out of
the hole. That's a totally different
technique that's very important for
their high-speed movements. So, when it
comes to squatting the heaviest loads or
building the most amount of muscle,
using a controlled tempo is going to be
the best way to squat. And that is
controlled on the way down and standing
with intent. So, now let's talk about
when you're going to use each of these
squat variations and who would need them
most. It makes sense to use the squat
pattern that's going to allow you to
shift the heaviest weights. The low bar
squat is the one to do that. However, if
all you do is perform the low bar
squats, you are going to end up with
underdeveloped muscles, mainly
quadriceps. So therefore, the best
approach is actually to utilize both. On
the flip side, if you just want to
maximize quadriceps growth, there still
is a place for low bar squats. And that
is teaching your body how to handle
heavier loads so that when you come back
to the high bar squats, you're using
heavier weights and can maximize
quadriceps growth through heavier
weights. So, if you want to know which
squat pattern you should be using, well,
the answer is both because one of the
most important training principles to
ensure your long-term progression is
training variation. And actually, both
of these movements are going to
complement each other so much. If you
found this advice useful, click the link
here and that's going to take you to my
ultimate deadlift tutorial, which is
going to be the only deadlift tutorial
that you'll ever need. And if you want
to keep getting stronger and keep
looking better, click subscribe for